# Contributing guide

This repository contains the development and releases of the magnetic materials domain ontology (MagMO), based on the [Elementary Multiperspective Materials Ontology (EMMO)](https://github.com/emmo-repo/EMMO).

This is a summary of all the relevant files.
- The directory [`.github`](.github/) contains the CI workflows to build the ontology, check it, release it, and compile the GitHub pages available at https://emmo-repo.github.io/domain-magnetic-materials/.
- The [`src/`](./src/) directory contains the Python scripts to generate the ontology and its different parts. The main file is [`src/build_ontology.py`](./src/build_ontology.py).
- The [`tests/`](./tests/) directory contains Python scripts (using the `pytest` testing framework) to check consistency in the ontology and the satellite files.
- The [`README.md`](./README.md) is the landing page for [the GitHub repository](https://github.com/emmo-repo/domain-magnetic-materials/) and for [the pages hosting the documentation](https://emmo-repo.github.io/domain-magnetic-materials/).
- The [catalog](./catalog-v001.xml) file maps the IRI of each ontology files to its location.
- The [contributors turtle file](./contributors.ttl) defines authors, contributors, and organization entities.
- The [dependencies turtle file](./magnetic-materials-dependencies.ttl) collects all the ontology dependencies.
- The [main ontology turtle file](./magnetic-materials.ttl) is the ontology generated by the Python scripts containing all entities.
- The [`pixi.toml`](./pixi.toml) specifies the software dependencies and the Pixi tasks, a set of pre-defined scripts useful for development.


## Installation

- To get started clone the mammos repository via ssh:
  ```console
  git clone git@github.com:emmo-repo/domain-magnetic-materials.git
  ```
  or https if you don't have an ssh key:
  ```console
  git clone https://github.com/emmo-repo/domain-magnetic-materials.git
  ```
  Then enter into the repository:
  ```console
  cd mammos
  ```

- Install [pixi](https://pixi.sh) if not already installed.

- Install dependencies with pixi:
  ```console
  pixi install
  ```

- The following pixi tasks are provided:

  - `pixi run build`: Build ontology `magnetic-materials.ttl` from `src/build_ontology.py`.
  - `pixi run reason`: Run ontology reasoner via `ontoconvert`.
  - `pixi run check`: Run ontology tests via `emmocheck`.
  - `pixi run all`: Run the tasks `build`, `reason`, `check` in order.
  - `pixi run test`: Run tests in order to check consistency among all the tracked files.


## Making changes

Changes in the `magnetic-materials.ttl` ontology should be made manually in the [Python builder script](./src/build_ontology.py) and not made using external software such as Protégé.

Once the changes have been completed, the ontology must be built and reasoned (via `pixi run all`). If the ontology checks do not fail, the ontology `magnetic-materials.ttl` should be committed.

The developer should push only after changes have been carried out both in the Python builder script and in the ontology turtle file. Tests will check that the turtle files generated by the Python builder is equivalent to the turtle files committed and tracked. These files will not be exactly equal because the software building the ontology does not have a consistent ordering when saving the turtle file. However, tests check that the two ontologies have the same items and that the metadata matches.

While the `magnetic-materials.ttl` ontology file should not be modified directly, the other turtle files `magnetic-materials-dependencies.ttl` and `contributors.ttl` need to be edited directly, if necessary.

All modification should follow EMMO's [Domain Ontologies Best Practices](https://github.com/emmo-repo/.github/wiki/DomainOntologiesBestPractices).


## Branching model

Development is carried out in the branch named after the next possible release. For example, if `0.0.5` is the latest release, the `0.0.6` branch will contain all changes to be released next.

After the first push to the development branch, all URLs containing the new version number, e.g. `https://w3id.org/emmo/domain/magnetic-materials/0.0.6/magnetic-materials`, are created via [GitHub's CI](.github/workflows/).


### Development via Pull Requests

Changes that need to be included in the new version should be development in different branches and then merged into the development branch via a PR. For example, if a new feature is being developed in the branch `new-feature`, we create a PR on GitHub by selecting `base: 0.0.6` and `compare: new-feature`.

For changes that are not version-dependent (such as changes in the `README.md`), PRs can be merged to `main`.


## Releasing a new version

### What **must** be in a new release

Ideally the first push to a new development branch should replace the version string (to the name of the branch) in the following places:

- in the ontology builder [`src/build_ontology.py`](./src/build_ontology.py),
- in the [`pixi.toml`](./pixi.toml),
- in the [`README.md`](./README.md) together with the version of any imports used,
- in the [catalog](./catalog-v001.xml),
- in the [contributors turtle file](./contributors.ttl),
- in the [dependencies turtle file](./magnetic-materials-dependencies.ttl).

After running `pixi run all`, the ontology file `magnetic-materials.ttl` should declare its `versionIRI` using the new version string and import the new `dependencies` and `contributors`. Such file should also be included in the first push to the new development branch.

### Creating a GitHub release

Once the branch is ready for a release, it is necessary to:
1. merge the development branch (e.g. `0.0.6`) to `main` via a PR,
2. delete the development branch (e.g. `0.0.6`),
2. create a GitHub release manually with the tag being the same name as the development branch (e.g. `0.0.6` without the letter `v`).
